PERIOD POVERTY

	Period poverty describes the struggle many low-income women and girls face while trying to afford menstrual products. The term also refers to the 
increased economic vulnerability women and girls face due to the financial burden posed by menstrual supplies. Period poverty is just one side effect
of the poverty and social inequality that millions of people experience every day. Period poverty is a continual issue for many impoverished countries with 
preexisting discriminatory stigmas surrounding the topic.
	In particular, period poverty in Nepal has become a dilemma for many Nepalese women and girls. The lack of access to menstrual sanitary products as well as
the cultural stigma of chhaupadi, an outdated tradition of isolating menstruating women and prohibiting them from touching others and communal objects, combine to make 
period poverty in Nepal a pressing issue for women. Chhaupadi is an ancient tradition practiced in some rural parts of Nepal. It involves banishing people, often young girls, 
to mud huts or sheds for the duration of their period, or even longer. It is believed they will otherwise bring their family bad luck, or ill health. Women, girls and people 
who menstruate are often left with little or no supplies, and no menstrual protection or washing facilities during their time away from home. This can cause a range of health 
issues, along with physical and psychological hardship. They might also be placed in considerable danger: there have been multiple reports of deaths in chhaupadi huts due to
 suffocation, fire, pneumonia, snake bites and animal attacks. There even might be peril of rapes. Chhaupadi has been illegal in Nepal since 2005 but it is still practiced in 
many communities. Although the Nepali government technically outlawed chhaupadi in 2005; however, 18 women died because of chhaupadi since this policy’s creation. Additionally, 
a 2019 study found that 77% of west-central Nepali girls had undergone menstrual exile. Thus such stigmas are worsening the condition. 
	Poverty line in Nepal is considered as earning less than Rs. 50 per day. According to the World Bank 25.2% of Nepalese live below the poverty line. In a developing nation 
like this where people still struggle to put food on the table not only are sanitary pads expensive but the government  charges an additional 13% VAT making sanitary hygiene products
unaffordable and inaccessible to all. According to health experts, a sanitary pad should be changed in 4 – 6 hours for hygienic purposes which are around 16 pads per menstruation.
Considering the average cost of 1 pad is Rs.12, a menstruating individual should spend approximately Rs. 192 per menstruation. However, a portion of that spending on menstrual products
could be avoided if governments recognized sanitary pads as necessary items instead of classing them as luxury goods. According to Pad2Go, a social enterprise advocating for VAT 
exemption in menstrual hygiene products without 13% VAT, a menstruating individual will be saving Rs 11,380 in a lifetime. In response to the demand and advocacy by humanitarian
and social activists to make menstrual hygiene products affordable and accessible in Nepal the government made announcement of a tax waiver in the annual budget for the fiscal
year 2022-23.The government has announced a 90 percent waiver on the custom tax being imposed on the import of sanitary pads and 1 percent on the import of its raw materials. 
This decision was however not welcomed by domestic pad producers as the government only waived custom tax on packaged sanitary pads and only some raw materials but the budget has not 
addressed the 5 percent excise duty on some raw materials and packaging materials. Due to which, domestic producers have to pay more tax on raw materials than finished goods. Not only 
that, to mitigate the stigma surrounding menstruation and its impact on menstruating individuals, the Nepal government has worked towards drafting the National Dignified Menstruation 
Policy, 2017 . The policy opens the door for more Nepali businesses to produce it there and declares that it intends to turn it from a luxury item to a basic necessity item. The
legislation also mentions tax breaks and subsidies for companies making them in Nepal. The current Tax waiver contradicts both National Dignified Menstruation policy and the Budget 
formulated by the same government. This is the bare minimum done by the government to distract the movement in favor of the personal interest of some big traders who import pads as 
the government still charges 13% VAT on sanitary products. All taxes involved in sanitary pads should be completely waived if the government wants to make sanitary hygiene products 
accessible to all and promote dignified menstruation.  The National Dignified Menstruation Policy only includes women and doesn’t address the issues faced by menstruating individuals 
and physically challenged people. A modified and inclusive version of the “National Dignified Menstruation Policy” should be passed if the government wants to be progressive. Menstrual 
cups, tampons, reusable pads, and disposable pads should all be made widely and affordably available. The government should also ensure that we gradually phase them out and promote
domestically produced pads. To promote accessible and hygienic menstrual health for all, the focus should be not only on removing taxes on sanitary pads or distributing them for
free, but also on education on menstrual hygiene, awareness, infrastructure, and removal of the prevailing social taboos. 
	Period poverty was, and continues to be, a serious social problem in Nepal. Period poverty in particular prevents low-income menstruators from bleeding with dignity as they are
forced to use unhygienic means during their period such as rags, used banners, old pieces of clothes, and even leaves. The cracks in the current system have been more glaringly exposed
during the global pandemic. In order to combat the challenges posed by affordable access to menstrual products, many countries, including India and the Maldives, have removed VAT from
period products. It is time for Nepal to follow suit and become the third country in South Asia to have no VAT on menstrual products and help mitigate period poverty in the country.